(hypnotic music)
Many people still view meditation
as a spiritual practice that's optional
while at the same time turning to psychics
as intermediaries to receive reflections of our own truths.
This doesn't make sense anymore.
If there were ever a time to access our own truth
to navigate through life, the time would be now,
and we can't do it without a clear and connected mind.
Sarah McLean has been teaching meditation for decades
and has some poignant thoughts
as to its value in our lives.
(hypnotic music)
Sarah, I wanna start this with a little tiny story,
just to kind of set it up because it happened
in the last 24 hours.
So here we are in Sedona, my heart's home,
your home as well, and I thought, "While in Rome,"
and I was pondering something and I was at a friend's house
who had a number of sets of little cards, you know,
the divination cards, angel cards and such.
I thought, "Sure, why not?"
picked a deck, rolled it out,
and I was asking about something very deep and profound,
and it said, "Listen," right?
Mm-hmm.
And about going inside
and getting the deeper messages, to be quiet.
My host, the friend, said,
"I chose those exact two cards earlier this morning."
Oh. (laughs)
In two different decks, she chose "Listen."
I told my other friend, the one I'm staying with,
and she said, "That's so funny,
"I just had the same conversation
"with my son this morning."
So en masse, there's this imperative
that we begin listening,
and I'm sure for very practical reasons
as well as deep spiritual reasons.
Mm-hmm.
And that's what so lovely about what you do,
is because your passion, your mission in life
is to help anybody start listening
to their own true voice via meditation,
Yes.
And you're just
superb at what you do.
You get through to the rich and the famous
as well as people in the judicial system,
justices, so forth, everybody.
Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
So let's talk about how that happened to you,
because you're a wild adventurer.
You've been in the Army,
you've traveled around the world on a bicycle.
(both laugh)
I mean you've lived in countries all over.
You've done it all.
You've lived in ashrams.
Mm-hmm.
So tell us about
how this began for you.
I think it had to do with listening really.
I really do because I was about 26 years old,
and I had what most people are searching for,
a really beautiful home,
I had a great job, I was making great money,
and I had a wonderful partner,
and I was healthy and happy.
And one day, I looked around and I thought,
"Is that all there is?"
And I was attracted to reading a book review,
and I remember reading about this approach to healing
by an Indian man who was writing a book about it,
and I was reading about how he used herbs and diet
and daily routine and meditation and massage,
and I thought, "Oh, that sounds interesting."
In the Army, I was a medic,
and we really treated the body more like a machine.
But here was this man who was sort of bringing to light
how all of these approaches through the senses
could bring about balance.
And I went and picked up that book,
and it was called Perfect Health by Deepak Chopra,
who, at the time, was not a household name.
And so I immediately read that book and said
I want everything in this book.
I wanna know how to practice
everything this man is talking about.
And it became about the science of Ayurveda.
Ayur means life, and veda means knowledge,
so it's the knowledge of life and longevity.
And so I immediately picked up the phone
and called and said, "Can I work for you?"
And they said, "Sure, come on down.
"You can volunteer and answer the phones."
And actually, it was in Massachusetts where I had grown up,
so I was pretty fearless on that.
I left my entire life and I went to Massachusetts
and worked as a volunteer, living in an environment
with a whole bunch of other people who meditated
and practiced Ayurveda.
And I got very involved in meditation
because that was the primary approach
for reducing stress in the nervous system
and for pretty much getting in touch with who we are
outside of illness or disease
or outside of who we think we are,
outside of the roles we play
and the responsibilities we have.
So it was really a...
It was the primary approach to healing,
and I didn't realize it at the time
I was reading that book review,
but the word Ayurveda,
I remember talking with someone
right after I had read this book review,
and I said, "That's what I'm going to be doing."
It was like a listening, like, "That's it."
And so you talk about listening,
and it brings up what I've heard
a lot of people talk about here in Sedona.
They say, "Prayer is talking to God,
"and meditation is listening to God."
That's a very good way to say it.
It is, but I've really thought about it like a koan,
and I thought prayer is talking to God
and sometimes listening.
Or asking a lot of,
asking for a lot of favors.
Yeah (laughs), right.
(Regina laughs)
"Please, please, please!"
"Please, I'll do this if you'll do that."
Right (laughs).
But then when I really looked at it more deeply,
is I realized that meditation helps us,
it's like the big Q-tip,
helps us to almost purify our senses
so we can more clearly listen
and pay attention to the whispers.
Absolutely, and this is a really key point.
Right now, we're living in an age of disinformation,
saturation of information until our minds and our bodies
are on complete overload.
And not only that, it's becoming...
There are so many voices saying so many things,
with the explosion in access through YouTube,
the Internet, and so forth
that we hear from a lot of our viewers,
"I am so overloaded, I don't know where to even begin now."
Right.
And the only place we really have to go
is inside to hear our own refined voice,
the highest essence of ourselves.
And you can't do that without being still.
You can't do that without some form of meditative practice,
and I would guess every person listening to this right now
would love to have full access to themselves
to find out what is it, for them and their lives,
absolutely their truth.
Yes.
And it might not be
someone else's truth but their truth.
Only you can give your truth, right?
Right, and I love...
That is one of the biggest benefits of meditation.
Sure, it's been researched so much now
and all the clinics are recommending it,
Mayo Clinic and Harvard Center for Mind-Body Healing,
but more than lowering blood pressure
and enhancing the immune system
and relieving the stress in the cardiovascular system,
the side effect or the side benefit
that I most love about meditation
is that it slowly and subtly
moves the reference point in our lives
from the world out there of noise and phenomenon
and information and what other people's opinions are of us,
subtly, we start to become our own authority.
We start to become, as Deepak Chopra would say,
we start to become "self-referred,"
referring really as our inner wisdom
becomes our reference point.
So no matter what's happening out there,
whether it be bad weather or even a natural disaster
or losing a job or getting into an argument with a partner,
it's almost like that's happening, yes, that's the scenery,
but the one who is experiencing it is so rooted
in balance and presence that it doesn't ever
get overshadowed by the world out there.
And I think that is what the real issues are.
And I say surround yourself in silence.
Really take a look at
what you are putting in your environment,
the noises that you...
are out there and that are coming in.
Do you walk into your apartment and flip on the television
or automatically turn on the radio
or automatically get on the phone
just to fill up that silence?
It's almost like we need to give
our nervous systems a break.
Hugely.
Yeah.
And let's talk about some of...
Because you see the entire swath of society, everyone,
what are you seeing by way of this incredible interference
with the nervous system, the mind, and so forth?
Can you give us just a couple of anecdotal situations
of people who have sought you out or found their way to you
who are literally shattered with so much incoming
they couldn't handle it any more?
Well, I have people coming to learn to meditate
from all walks of life, whether it be they've just,
their partner just died
or they found out they're at stage four in cancer
or they've lost their job
or they've retired and they don't know who they are
without their reference point of the work.
Without the business card.
Right.
So I work with many people on that level,
and it's almost like their dark night of the soul.
And I had mine, and it was a couple of days, I mean,
and this is the fallacy that there is only one in your life
(laughs) because there can be a few.
But I often am with people while they're
in the middle of that
or in the middle of their wake-up call.
And of course, it'd be great to avoid that
and wake up before the wake-up call.
But I find that people have...
I think that stress is building up in the nervous system,
whether it be from external too much noise
or toxicity in the environment or the food
or toxic relationships, whether it to be a job
or to a spouse or to friends or to family members.
I find that this layer of stress keeps us
from really acknowledging our inner wisdom.
So for instance, a woman came to me,
and she was with her husband who had had a stroke.
They were visiting from Detroit.
They lived in a very,
not a great neighborhood.
She had just retired from being a school teacher.
She was there for years.
And often, when people come to meditate with me,
I ask them, "Well, what do you want?
"What do you really want?"
Most people haven't even asked themselves that question.
And I said, "Well, if you dare to dream,
"what would you want?"
She goes, "I I want to live in Sedona."
And I said, "Well, why wouldn't you be able to do that?"
She said, "Well, I can't sell my house.
"It's not worth anything.
"We owe more than what its value is,
"and I can't leave Detroit."
And over maybe three to six months
after she learned to meditate,
she could see where her mind was actually the obstacle
to possibilities occurring.
So I just have to report, a year or two later,
she's living here in Sedona
happily with her husband,
not even a second thought about did she do the right thing.
Mm-hmm.
So it can happen.
It can happen where--
It worked itself out.
The creative energy can flow
if you have yourself unblocked enough to be clear...
I don't wanna to use the word channel,
but conduit for information for your own essence.
Yes, and what is our own essence?
Our own essence, we call it,
when we are meditating,
we turn our attention inward.
We escape the world of form and phenomenon
and turn our attention inward,
and we're not looking for a particular experience
while we meditate.
We are literally just doing it
to purify the nervous system.
And when we do it, we go to subtler and subtler levels
of the thinking process until we bump into
the one who is having the thought, the presence.
And the qualities of our presence,
each one of us has these qualities
of creativity and silence and perfection
and bliss and infinite organizing power.
And right action for the moment.
Spontaneous right action is one of the major access.
That's what we can access when we start
having meditation be part of our lives.
So that when we are not exactly sure
of which way to take, go left or right
at a certain fork in the road,
when we meditate, we have access
to the spontaneous right action,
and we don't have to question it.
We don't have to overthink it.
We don't have to sleep on it.
We literally know because it's,
it's almost like it's our yoga.
And meditation comes from the yoga tradition,
and yoga means the union of mind and body
and spirit and environment,
and it means that when we think something,
when we feel it and think it and say it and do it
and they're all in alignment, that's yoga.
And spontaneous right action is from that yoga.
And the thing about that
that I find so beautiful is
once the mind has been disciplined
to be able to go into the more quiet state
to allow this nervous system response and so forth,
then you don't have to be in a state of meditation
to have this knowing anymore.
There is just a sense of knowing.
Exactly.
It's actually, that's again the yoga.
It's literally creating
an immersion into these qualities
and then bringing it out into our waking state.
That's actually...
We use the analogy oftentimes when you look at a rug
and when people are dyeing the yarn for the rug,
they put the yarn into this big vat of dye,
and especially in the Middle East,
where I watched them do it,
they take the dye, the yarn that's been dyed,
and they lay it out on the ground,
and the sun fades the qualities of the dye out,
and they go over and over and keep on doing that.
And what happens is eventually,
the qualities of the dye
are completely infused into this yarn,
and that's the same thing that happens
when we meditate regularly,
is the quality or the qualities of our soul
are now infused in our day-to-day life.
And you did say the word practice.
It's literally a training of the awareness
to turn the attention inward.
Because if you noticed the way the body is designed,
it's designed to sort of decode the world out there
We are either going to smell it, taste it,
touch it, see it, or hear it.
And so all of our senses are focusing us out there
and rarely, especially in the Western world,
do we say, "Okay, let's close our eyes
"and turn our attention inward,"
unless it's in the form of prayer or if we're kissing.
Or if we're not wanting to watch a movie
or some sort of scary scene, we'll close our eyes.
But rarely do we close our eyes when we're awake.
And so this is a hurdle a lot of people have to get over.
It is. It takes time.
You've been doing this many, many years,
it's so second nature.
I've been doing it many years.
I can't think if I can't take time to close my eyes.
I can't.
(Sarah laughs) I have a hard time
sensing my way through things
if I'm overwhelmed by the physical world.
Exactly.
And I find that it's my salvation,
is to be able to do what you say,
to just close my eyes, go inside,
and take a breath, and there's your answer,
whatever it is you need.
But it didn't happen overnight.
Right
Let's talk about
what happens with people that come
for the first time and say,
"Oh, I have ants in my pants.
"I just can't seem to quiet my mind.
"I can't seem to keep still."
Now give us an idea of how you would work
with someone from the beginning.
Okay, I do have a lot of what they call
type A personalities come in.
I bet.
And they say, "I've tried to meditate.
"I've gotten the books, I've gotten the CDs,
"and I can't do it.
"My mind won't...
"I can't quiet my mind."
And I'll say you don't have to be the one
to quiet the mind.
It's not a requirement to do that.
Meditation is made up of two things.
It's made up of your attention
and a focus of your attention.
So for those of you listening at home, I'd say
right now, turn your attention
to the one who is listening to this broadcast.
Turn your attention to the one who is listening
or watching, and there is a presence there,
and this presence is the real you.
It's not necessarily what you're wearing
or your age or your height or your weight
or your job or your family relations.
It's none of that.
There is a presence there that's been
with each one of us since we can remember.
And this presence, some of the qualities
are silence and balance and perfection
and bliss and happiness and wholeness.
And so when we turn our attention inward,
we start to access that.
But so when people say, "I can't quiet the mind,"
I say, "Okay, let's use your awareness
"and focus on something."
Now some people focus on their breath.
That's using the inner subtle experience of sound,
if you listen to your breath,
or the subtle experience of touch or feel
because you can feel the breath.
You're not touching something out there.
You're not listening to something out there,
but you're literally sort of listening in your mind's ear
and feeling in your inside.
It's like if you brought your attention right now
to your left foot, it's been there all along,
but that's the subtle change of awareness.
So we're using a very easy subtle change of awareness,
and we'll use a focus.
Now some people use a breath.
Some people use a mantra.
Mantras are from every tradition.
I like to use a basic mantra.
We've all heard the word "om."
Om now has a meaning.
They say it's the sound of the universe expanding,
so that could be a mantra.
Sometimes I use the mantra
where I think the sound "so"
on the inhale, and I think the sound "hum" on the exhale.
And this mantra doesn't mean anything, but it's literally
the linguistic representation of the breath.
Mm-hmm.
So we can think that, and every time we go,
"Oh gosh, now I have to think about
"what I'm gonna have for lunch
"or what I'm going to do tomorrow at work
"or what I'm going to wear at this meeting I'm having,"
every time the attention drifts away
from the focus in meditation,
we just simply and easily bring our attention back to it
without getting angry at ourselves,
without thinking we're doing it wrong.
So we don't actually stop ourselves from thinking,
but the practice of meditation
slows down the thinking process
and we go to subtler and subtler levels of that
until we bump into our presence.
And you're right, that part
that people go through, that beating themselves up
because their mind is straying
rather than like a little child
gently nudging the thought back, you know.
Yeah.
This is big
because we even put judgment on ourselves
in the very thing we're doing
to connect with ourselves (laughs).
Yeah.
And thoughts are a part of meditation.
There is no way to stop thinking by thinking about it.
Right.
It's impossible.
The nature of the mind is to think,
just like the nature of the eye is to see.
So that's just what's going on here.
It's just the nature of the mind.
So when we can interrupt the constant flow of thoughts
with a mantra that has no particular meaning,
it interrupts the thoughts where one,
the meaning of one thought leads
to the meaning of another.
Right.
Because there is no visual association.
Right, or mental association.
Or mental association, right.
So it immediately just almost hiccups
or stops the mind for an instant,
and then the mind will pick up with
"What's for dinner?" or "What time is it?"
or "Is this working?"
So I say meditation is a lot like brushing my teeth.
I do it every single day.
I'm not looking for a fabulous experience
when I'm brushing my teeth.
I know it's immediately going to make me feel better,
and I know that the long-term effects are great.
So I'm in Sedona here and I'm a meditation teacher,
which I think is pretty cliche.
(both laugh)
And the emphasis oftentimes here in Sedona is,
"What are your experiences in meditation?
"Did you meet your spirit guide or--"
Think paranormal events.
Right.
Yeah, exactly.
And I say meditation is boring.
It's boring.
But what's exciting is when we walk through the world
and our intentions and desires are manifested
and we find that we're much more intuitive
and we can hear ourselves
and we have the access to spontaneous right action,
and we feel a sense of silence permeating
the noise of the world out there.
And I think that that is,
that's where the benefits show up in meditation.
Yes, you can have some exciting things
happen in meditation, but it's rare.
I mean I've lived in monasteries for a couple of years.
I lived in an ashram.
Most of the time, meditation is not thrilling.
(laughs) It's really not.
But what is thrilling is
sort of navigating the world inside,
and it is a practice of turning the attention inward.
Initially, we are going to get more distracted.
It just is the way it is.
But over time, we literally are training
our brain to turn it inward.
Now I know since you've been meditating,
you can close your eyes
and probably access that silence immediately.
Pretty quickly, yeah.
Yeah, and I can too,
although some days I'd have thousands of thoughts.
Yeah, there are those days,
and usually after about 10 minutes, I'll say,
"I'll try this later.
(Sarah laughs)
"It's not gonna give it up today."
Right, right.
There's too much running in my nervous system.
And this is really critical.
The health of our nervous system is critical
to every function in our lives pretty much,
the way we express ourselves, our emotions,
our mind, our bodies,
and this is literally like having a Saab,
constant tuneup for the nervous system.
It is.
We tend to...
I think many people have looked at it
for so many years as woo-woo,
as a woo-woo thing.
"Oh, it's optional.
"Oh, when I get around to...
"Maybe when I retire, I'll get into all of that
"kind of spiritual stuff."
(Sarah laughs)
This is not a spiritual thing.
No.
And I think it's
very important that we understand
this is an integration of the body, mind, and our intuition,
and we need all of what we can get right now.
Yes, and I agree with you.
The nervous system, our nervous system
has been evolving for thousands,
hundreds of thousands of years.
But if you look at our lives
over the last 200 or 300 years even,
with the advent of all these electronics
and capturing fossil fuel
and the way we move food around the world
and we freeze it and microwave it,
and we can stay up all night
talking on the phone or watching TV or working,
we have put on a huge amount of pressure
on our nervous system, our digestive system,
our elimination system, and our rejuvenation system
to really keep up, and it is exhausted.
I mean people are suffering now from adrenal fatigue
because they feel like
they have to over-schedule themselves.
Well, and then you boost it with caffeine,
for example, have a triple espresso
in the morning or what not,
and really take it to super charge going into the day.
And day after day, the entire being
is completely depleted.
And we're looking at not just...
everything that you've just mentioned,
and in addition, the invisible factors.
We have digital information passing.
We can't imagine how much information
is passing through our brains
and our bodies and nervous systems.
Even sitting here in this pristine place in Sedona,
with signals coming from towers and such
Right.
We may not be consciously participating,
but our system's being bombarded with it nonetheless.
Yeah, we just aren't the instrument for receiving it,
but if I had my cellphone here, I could--
It's still passing through.
Right.
Those signals pass through.
I mean they're bouncing off all around.
Yeah.
And so there is the hidden factor
as well as everything that we are
consciously doing to ourselves.
Right.
Let's look at what happens when...
There's another element to this that I find really,
this is important.
We are now starting to behave like automatons.
We're walking through life
trying to meet our mortgage payments,
our credit card payments.
Most people are doing things they do not love doing
in order to just be able to put food on their...
Well, as Bush said, "put food on their families,"
(Sarah laughs) but we say food on the...
(both laugh)
food on the table,
and to keep from getting removed from their dwelling.
Right.
So the very thing that feeds us as beings,
as human beings is our own creativity.
And I've talked about this in my own
to-te-mic commentary.
We are incredibly unique,
highly creative beings
if we keep ourselves open to it.
But what's happening with what you're talking about,
this adrenal stress and the stress of life,
is we've almost shut off our access to our creativity
in probably 90% of people's lives almost completely.
Right.
We're living by rote.
We're just a program, a robot running a program.
This is sad.
This is very sad.
Yeah,
it's a habit of mind.
What we're doing is we get up
and we start having the same thoughts,
I mean it's been said 60 to 90,000 thoughts a day.
The same ones we have yesterday we're having again today
and having again tomorrow.
And we train the mind that way with these neuronal pathways
to respond to every situation similarly.
And when we don't take a break
from the constant bombardment,
we don't have access to that gap between the thoughts
where all possibilities exist.
True creativity can rise.
Right, so when we meditate,
we literally are delving that vat of dyes.
One of the qualities is creativity.
If you look at people who meditate,
they find access to a lot of creativity
they never knew they had,
and I've seen amazing things with that.
Instead of watching television all night
or even watching the Internet,
like everybody is doing right now
who is watching this interview,
to take the time to be able to, as we say,
make this a practice and quiet the mind
but then access our own creativity.
And it doesn't matter, it can be through
maybe picking up a guitar you haven't touched in 30 years
or it can be cooking, it can be taking a cooking class
or coming up with anything--
Painting.
It can be painting, poetry,
writing, anything,
but that that thing that makes time stand still,
it makes me sad that so few people in the planet
actually take time for that thing
that makes time stand still.
Well, when you say time stands still,
it's a great analogy for meditation
because the world out there is a form and phenomenon.
Things exist in time and space.
And when we transcend the world out there
through closing our eyes and meditating,
we literally transcend time and space,
and we go to that place of infinite timelessness
and the eternal sense,
and we can just taste it just a little bit,
and so we are able to,
when we transcend through meditation,
bring that with us to that transcendence.
And meditation can be done anywhere.
You can close your eyes, sit comfortably.
You don't need to do special hand positions.
You don't need a special cushion or love beads or a diet.
Simply sitting down with your eyes closed,
turning your cellphone off,
planning, I'd say, to start,
10 to 20 minutes, I'd love to say twice a day,
but even if you do it once a day,
closing the eyes, planning the 10 minutes,
sitting down focusing on your breath initially,
relaxing the body,
paying attention to the way the body feels,
then bringing your attention to the breath,
and then you can start that mantra,
I suggested "so" on the inhale,
"hum" on the exhale,
and simply just paying attention
to the sound of the sounds.
And you can time yourself by looking at a clock.
Basically though, I do suggest people time themselves
and to stick with the amount of time
they've already decided to do it.
And one of the most important things I like to say is
at the very end of it, sit with your eyes closed
and just in the silence for a minute or two
before opening the eyes.
Because when we meditate,
subjectively, we might not feel like we've gone very deep.
But if we were to measure your brain waves
and measure your blood pressure
and measure your respiration rate,
we would find that just by sitting there
repeating a word that has no meaning
does slow down the respiration rate,
does reduce the blood pressure.
Well, you know that if you try
to come out of it too quickly
because your head is flooded (laughs).
Just trying to come back to consciousness
of the world around you, it's very disconcerting
if you don't take that extra minute or two.
It's important because you're literally
at a different state of consciousness.
And it's different than what you're used to.
We're all used to being either awake, asleep, or dreaming.
But when we meditate, we're literally
in a fourth state of consciousness,
which some people call soul awareness
or glimpsing the soul,
Deepak Chopra calls it glimpsing the soul,
or even atma darshan,
which means keeping the company of your own soul.
And when we're in that state,
our brain waves are in the theta waves,
which is a deep rested state.
So jumping from that into this regular state,
the beta state, we're really moving quickly.
It's just like jumping out of bed
when you think you're late for work in the morning.
You know how it sort of colors your day.
This is the same with meditation.
You can't jump from one state to another.
We have to allow that transition period.
And any thoughts on being able to do this
during, as part of your workday, to refresh yourself,
say, at lunch hour or something?
Most people are embarrassed.
"I can't do that at the cubby."
Right, well--
Some people have said
they even go into the ladies' room or the men's room
and sit there (laughs).
Well, I've taught a number of reporters who,
they work in these big cubicles,
and I say, "Just go out into your car."
One of my favorite places is meditating in my car.
I taught this one neurosurgeon from Mayo Clinic.
He says, "The minute I get home, my dogs want me,
"my wife wants me, my kids want me."
He goes, "What do I do?"
And I said, "Don't get out of your car.
(Regina laughs) "Park a mile down the street."
Obviously, you can't do it while you're driving,
but park down the street,
close your eyes, lock the door,
time yourself.
Just it's your sanctuary.
Turn the music off though.
Anything that starts to attract your attention outward
is sort of going against what we're trying to do,
which is turning the attention inward.
So closing the eyes, timing it.
I'm in this grocery store parking lot
all the time between appointments.
And ideally, meditate before you eat
because when you eat, the body is really working
to take the world out there
and turn it into the world that we call your body
through food and the digestion process.
So when we meditate, the body starts slowing down,
and when we're eating, it starts to speed up.
So we want to do it after we eat,
at least after an hour after we eat,
or before we eat.
Let's talk about insomniacs
because I mean this does affect sleep patterns,
but I personally, I like it when I wake up,
if something wakes me up at 3 or 4 in the morning.
That's a beautiful time, I find,
the clearest time to meditate.
There's not a lot of any kind of noise of any kind,
physical, psychic noise, you name it.
But what about using this for sleep disturbances
or sleep patterns?
That's a great question.
Well, one of the things, I've read a lot of research,
and a lot of the research proves
that meditation helps to reduce sleeping medication,
helps to improve the quality of sleep,
and sleep is the number one way we get rid of stress
in our nervous system.
So when we have so much stress
that it starts to affect the quality of our sleep,
really, it's a double whammy.
We are not able to recover quickly.
So yes, meditation has been proven
to increase the quality of sleep.
Now I wanna just explain this because,
because sometimes, when we finish meditating,
we feel really relaxed.
It feels like, "Oh, I could go right to sleep."
But over time, you're going to really feel clearer.
It's sort of this clear awareness.
Right.
So ideally, you don't meditate right before bed.
You meditate before, ideally before breakfast
and then again before dinner.
If you can't do one of those, you can do it before lunch.
But you've mentioned the yogic hour.
There is this hour between 4 and 6 am,
before sunrise.
Mm, it's wonderful.
It's traditional for meditation.
That's the ambrosia hour.
And when I lived in a Zen Buddhist monastery,
we would be awake at that time
and we would start our first meditation before 5.
And that is the time where the nervous system
has gotten its deep rest from sleep
so that you're not dealing with the big stresses
but you're actually able to refine
some of the other stresses that might get in the way
of you listening to you.
Mm-hmm, it's a lovely experience.
It is.
It's my favorite (laughs).
I mean when you're in there, in that state,
I could just get lost and stay there for hours,
but that's usually not something that's desirable.
(Sarah laughs) There's no time.
You got to get out and work (laughs)
Yeah, you got to get out and work
and get on with my life, but it's very beautiful.
Any final thoughts on this?
I mean you've given a lot of really practical information
because people do think, "Oh, I'll wait 'til later.
"I'm intimidated.
"Maybe I'll do it on the weekend."
But you've given us a lot of ideas,
how you can incorporate into your everyday life.
It doesn't have to take a lot of time.
Any other final thoughts on the imperative
as to why this should be mandatory
for every human being on the planet?
Well, I think that a lot of us,
you had said this earlier,
are doing things we don't really like that we're doing,
and it's again the habit of mind.
And I think meditation really helps us
to focus on who we really are outside of
whether it's a sickness or our jobs or our family,
who we really are and what we really want.
I was always afraid to ask for what I wanted
because I didn't even know what it was.
And I had voices in my head from family members
who would say, "Can't you stop being so selfish?"
or, "I wouldn't do that if I were you,"
or that kind of thing which sort of thwarted
my own conversation with myself.
And I think meditation helps us to reconnect
with what we really want,
what really makes our soul sing,
and that's the real reason that we're here.
We each need to sing our song, really,
and I'm not trying to be esoteric.
It's how can we do that
without taking somebody else's idea
of what that looks like and imposing it on ourselves.
So meditation helps us to get clear about that.
Absolutely, and break out of the prison
of habit, of habitual living.
Exactly.
And so I thank you so much
for taking the time with us.
And we never got to know each other
when I was living in Sedona all those years,
which I'm amazed because
I was right down the street from you
and there is a really beautiful resonance here,
and I'm glad that finally, we came together now.
This is the time.
It's a pleasure
meeting you, Sarah.
Thank you.
(tranquil music)
Every one of us needs to take
quiet time for ourselves now more than ever.
If you need a little help getting going,
you can connect with Sarah's work through her website
at sedonameditation.com.
She has some very helpful CDs
to help you find your zone
so you can begin having the benefits
of a clear connection with your own greatest truths.
Until next time.
Thanks for watching CMN.
(tranquil music)